---
layout: post
title: "Nove"
---

Writing Good Tests.

This afternoon I paired with Mateu on my Java TTT. We deleted a lot of code,
and reverted back to the step *before* implementing rules for win and draw.
I wanted to try and get a grasp of the thought process behind designing with
tests and truly doing the simplest thing possible.  

The first thing I noticed, was that it took us almost half an hour to write the
first test, and it wasn't the test I was expecting. I had approached this part
of the project with my prior knowledge of the domain at the forefront of my
mind. I knew that in order to determine if there is a winner on the board,
somehow I need to check each row, column and diagonal for 3 matching symbols.
With that in mind, I started with rows, and designed a test for the creation of
a method that would return the "rows" in a given board.

When working with Mateu, he took a big step back. "What is the feature that the
client is expecting you to deliver?". Having explained what it was, it was
immediately obvious that a test of that name would not have been suitable (it
was something about rules and knowing if there was a winner/draw). So instead,
we looked a simpler question, "What if the first row was all X's". This test
made sense to me, it breaks the problem down, and faciliates writing the
simplest thing that could possibly work. I'm keen to finish off working through
this problem and see what solution it leads me to. My hope is that it will lead
me to a simpler way to create projects, because ultimately I won't know the
domain in advance and I'll need to be able to make incremental steps in the
project design. 
