---
layout: post
title: "Cinque"
---

Refactoring and Reading.

The majority of this morning and the early afternoon was spent refactoring my
Java TTT code. The priority was to try and alter my Display class to allow the
IO to be injected in for ease of testing and better abstraction from
`System.in` and `System.out`.

Such a major class change, had some rippling effects through my code, test
spies and class initialization within `Main`. This felt like a lot of work for
such a minor change, and it highlighted an issue within my test suites where
I had not suitable refactored them. Whilst refactoring, I had Clean Code sat
next to me, because it is my current reading material. I was actually on the
chapter called "Clean Tests", and so I gave it a quick skim read and the
section on using *Domain Specific Language* caught my eye, it made a lot of
sense to me to see tests as written as concisely as possible, and as clearly as
possible. The examples in the book are too verbose to be put into the blog
here, but the point is that they follow a very simple pattern of
**Build-Operate-Check**.

The afternoon was spent reading a bit more of Clean Code before my IPM. Before
starting at 8th Light, I stopped by on a Friday Waza to catch up with everyone.
At that time Ced was at the end of his first week, and I asked him how it had
gone. Outside of synonyms for "really well", he did mention that there was
a lot of reading to be done. With that in mind I have tried to spend a bit of
time improving my speed reading. I have tried to use an app on iOS called
Acceleread which actually seemed to work quite well, although it has a few bugs
and the developers are no longer supporting it. Nevertheless, it was worthwhile
spending a bit of time using that application, text books are notoriously
difficult to read quickly since the regular examples break up the flow,
however, I feel like I'm making good headway with Clean Code. I hope to have it
finished by the end of this week. 

