---
layout: post
apprenticeship: true
title: "Sette"
---

Staying Green.

So, I've been busily working away on my Java TTT without much trouble, just
slowly adding *test driven* features when I've started to notice a couple of
things: One, my board class seems to be getting a bit too big. Coming from my
Ruby TTT, I am somewhat distracted by the size of the methods that I'm
producing in Java, so my first thought is:

> "Is the Board class getting too big, or is it just that Java is more verbose
> than I'm used to".

On further self inspection, I think the sensation/gut feeling I'm getting is
one of, "I'm not sure what methods are in the board class, I'm losing track of
its capabilities". This sounds like a sign of a class that needs to be broken
down, but I'm not immediately sure I know where it should be split. By way of
an interim solution, the thought of making some of the methods simpler and
shorter (more Ruby-ish) seems like a good idea.

Decision time then, whats the best way to quickly (oh, hindsight!) improve the
methods in my Board class...**change the underlying data structure**. Yes,
that's definitely it, great idea.

#### Step 1

```shell
git commit
```

#### Step 2

Change `this.cells = new char[9][]...` to `this.cells = Arrays.asList(...)`.

#### Step 3

Run test suite. Panic a little bit. Plow on changing methods until all your
tests are green.

#### Step 4

Regret decision.

#### Step 5

```shell
git reset HEAD~1
```

#### Step 6

Stay Green!

Change the constructor assignment as before. However, this time use your
`showCells()` method to encapsulate the change and keep the test suite green.

#### Step 7

Continue to change all the methods in your class to utilise the new data
structure but also modify them to convert their returning value back into the
old data structure where necessary. So for the entire refactoring process, the
test suite stays green.

#### Step 8

Flick the switch. This point is where it will get a little hairy, and I'm not
quite at this step yet. However, it is very clear that most of the leg work is
now done, so it will be much simpler than the alternative and because the
changes have been small and incremental, we haven't broken the software in
doing so.

### Examples

#### constructor

```java
public Board() {
  this.cells = new char[]{'1', '2', '3', '4', '5', '6', '7', '8',
    '9'};
  this.size = cells.length;
}
```

```java
public Board() {
  this.cells = Arrays.asList('1', '2', '3', '4', '5', '6', '7', '8',
      '9');
  this.size = cells.size();
}
```

#### showCells()

```java
public char[] showCells() {
  return cells;
}
```

```java
public char[] showCells() {
  char[] results = new char[9];
  for(int i=0;i<9;i++) {
    char cell = this.cells.get(i);
    results[i] = cell;
  }
  return results;
}
```

#### rows()

```java
public char[][] rows() {
  char[] row1 = Arrays.copyOfRange(cells, 0, 3);
  char[] row2 = Arrays.copyOfRange(cells, 3, 6);
  char[] row3 = Arrays.copyOfRange(cells, 6, 9);
  return new char[][]{row1, row2, row3};
}
```

```java
public char[][] rows() {
  char[] row1char = new char[3];
  char[] row2char = new char[3];
  char[] row3char = new char[3];
  List<Character> row1 = cells.subList(0, 3);
  List<Character> row2 = cells.subList(3, 6);
  List<Character> row3 = cells.subList(6, 9);
  for (int i=0;i<3;i++) {
    char cell1 = row1.get(i);
    char cell2 = row2.get(i);
    char cell3 = row3.get(i);
    row1char[i] = cell1;
    row2char[i] = cell2;
    row3char[i] = cell3;
  }
  return new char[][]{row1char, row2char, row3char};
}
```

These changes were made in order to try and simplify the board class, and
whilst they have achieved that, it still feels a bit unwieldy. So there is
further work to be done.
